# Spotify
Identifying what makes a hit track

# Context
 
The purposes of this project are:

To identify what makes a hit track and predict the popularity of any song by analyzing various metrics in the dataset. This prediction helps any content creator/musician to understand what Spotify listeners prefer to hear more nowadays, which is key in order to compete in the market.

A content-based recommendation system that can suggest artists for any users would also be built.

The dataset was gotten from the Kaggle.Some of the key attributes present in each event in the data are:

Key — The estimated overall key of the track. Integers map to pitches using standard pitch class notation. Ex: 0 = C, 1 = C♯/D♭, 2 = D, and so on. If no key was detected, the value is -1.

Mode — Mode indicates the modality (major or minor) of a track, the type of scale from which its melodic content is derived. Major is represented by 1 and minor is 0.

Acousticness — A confidence measure from 0.0 to 1.0 of whether the track is acoustic. 1.0 represents high confidence the track is acoustic.

Danceability — Danceability describes how suitable a track is for dancing based on a combination of musical elements, including tempo, rhythm stability, beat strength, and overall regularity. A value of 0.0 is least danceable and 1.0 is the most danceable.

Energy — Energy is a measure from 0.0 to 1.0 and represents a perceptual measure of intensity and activity. Typically, energetic tracks feel fast, loud, and noisy.

Instrumentalness — Predicts whether a track contains no vocals. The closer the instrumentalness value is to 1.0, the greater likelihood the track contains no vocal content.

Loudness — The overall loudness of a track in decibels (dB). Values typical range between -60 and 0 dB.

Valence — A measure from 0.0 to 1.0 describing the musical positiveness conveyed by a track. Tracks with high valence sound more positive.

Tempo — The overall estimated tempo of a track in beats per minute (BPM).

Popularity — The popularity of the track. The value will be between 0 and 100, with 100 being the most popular.

# Results

Audio Characteristics over the years

Acousticness which was on the rise in the early 1900's has dropped significantly over the years. Songs contain low speechiness but the level of speechiness flunctuated between 1900 to 1940. Energy trend has been on the rise from 1950s with recent years having songs with the highest energy. Danceability and Valence have been somewhat steady over the years.


What makes a hit track?

The following can be concluded from the analysis:
Majority of the most popular songs are songs that were released in recent years.Release year and popularity are correlated . This makes sense as most songs generated by spotify algorithm are recent songs.

Popular songs tends to be energertic and Loud. There's a high correlation between Energy and Loudness

There is a negative correlation between popularity and acousticness. There is a low chance of songs  purely accoustic to be popular.  Acousticness is highly negatively correlated with energy, loudness and release year.

Danceability and valence are highly correlated. A popular song has musical positiveness and is suitable for dancing.


Recommendation

I would recommend that an artist should produce a song with  high energy ,loudness and valence and with less or no acousticness. This would improve the chances of popularity.



